These are reasonable assumptions: corolla length and diameter are predictive of hummingbird bill shape. a hummingbird with a long bill cannot necessarily feed from short-tube flowers if the bill is too wide (Temeles 1996). Flower length and width function as separate filters and a bill must conform to both to access the flower nectary. Curvature of the corolla tube and bill introduce yet another filter. While length and width constrain morphological matching in the transverse (xy) plane (Figure 1), curvature additionally constrains matching in the lateral (xz) and frontal (yz) plane. Curvature is therefore desirable to measure, because a flower that is “more curved” could, for example, be interpreted to be more specialized than another species that is “less curved”. 

Co-existing plants facilitate and compete for pollination (Robertson 1895, Clements and Long 1923, Reviewed in Rathcke 1983, Waser 1983, and Mitchell 2009). Under competitive conditions (Rathcke 1983), and given that pollinators have finite foraging bouts, selection should increasingly favour floral phenotypes that are attractive to pollinators (e.g. volume of floral nectar). But a pollinator visit provides only an opportunity for successful gamete exchange.  Chances of successful fertilization are further improved if the floral phenotype also promotes visit fidelity, for which there is also competition (Mitchell et al 2009). Improving visit fidelity reduces pollen loss and crowding of the stigmatic surface with interspecific pollen. Competition should then promote selection for pollinator divergence leading to floral isolation - the interaction between floral traits and pollinator behaviour that reduces interspecific pollen transfer (Grant 1949). Ultimately, competition may drive selection for floral character displacement (Armbruster and Muchhala 2009).

In a competitive plant-pollinator community we expect floral isolation to co-evolve between a plant species suffering from improper pollen transfer,  and pollinators competing for floral rewards. Curvature is one dimension of morpho-space wherein selection can drive displacement of plant-pollinator morphology, thus promoting floral isolation and improving fitness for both parties. For this reason, curvature is of particular interest for its role in the maintainance of plant-pollinator diversification. 

Because floral curvature co-evolves with pollinator morphology, we expect pollinators to recogniize to some extent curved flowers as make their foraging bouts more efficient. Curvature then potentially operates as both mechanical and ethological isolating factors (Grant 1949). 

The modern view is that plant-pollinator morphology is adaptive: changes in flower shape can improve fitness by reducing interspecific pollen transfer and competition for pollinators (Rathcke 1983, Harder and Johnson 2009, Minnaar et al 2019). Pollinators adapt to these forms when their foraging performance is affected. Thus, a plant species experiencing differential ecological conditions across its range may adapt divergently to local conditions. 

The realization that plant-pollinator morphology is indicative of function (Sprengel 1793) remains foundational to the study of community assembly and co-evolution (e.g. in hummingbird plants: Grant and Grant 1965, Stiles 1995, Maglianesi et al 2014, Martín González et al 2018, Sonne et al 2019). 

 floral characteristics operate in concert with the ethological habits of the pollinator. As plant-pollinator communities evolve, their behaviours and morphology are influenced by competition, facilitation, and environmental filtering. For example, plants facing interspecific competition for pollinators may diverge in their shape in 

 Communities of plants and pollinators comprise a range of generalists and specialists (Jordano Bascompte Olesen 2003 EcoLetters), their behaviours and morphology influenced by inter- and intra-specific competition, facilitation, and environmental filtering (Muchhala et al 2014, López-Segoviano et al 2017, Temeles et al 2000, Krauss et al 2017), (Bergamo et al 2018), and (Wolowski 2017). Plant-pollinator partinoning is one result 


Grant (1950) proposed that 'mutations causing the petals to grow up as a fused corolla tube around the stamens' may have been one of the primitive adaptations promoting flower constancy. Constancy is important because…Today it is generally recognized that plants with long and/or narrow corolla tubes promote visitation by hummingbirds, flies, lepitoptrans, and long-tongued hymenoptrans, and exclude those pollinators (e.g. beetles) and robbers unable to reach the nectary.

Random writing from “writing.txt” 
Flower constancy, the restricted visitation by a pollinator to one flower 'type' (Waser 1986) neccesitates morphological and phenological diversity. A community of plants sharing pollinators can individually benefit from reducing interspecific pollen transfer (Dobbs 1750) - floral properties that encourage constancy can be adaptive. Constancy can be mediated by phenology (XXX), floral rewards (XXX), and morphology (XXX). Considering the latter, Grant (1950) speculated that 'mutations causing the petals to grow up as a fused corolla tube around the stamens' may have been one of the primitive morphological adaptations promoting flower constancy. Today it is generally recognized that plants with long and/or narrow corolla tubes promote visitation by hummingbirds, flies, lepitoptrans, and long-tongued hymenoptrans, and exclude those animals (e.g. beetles) unable to reach the inner hypanthium for nectar. While the co-variation of corolla length and diameter have been considered in the context of flower-hummingbird bill diversity (Temeles XXX), curvature has not received the same close attention. 

Our discussion focuses on those flowers with fused (Asteridds) or invaginated (Rosidds) petals that form a corolla tube or nectar spur, respectively. For brevity we continue by focusing on corolla tubes, as the implications appear to be identical for spurs. The morphology of corolla tubes evolve through three spatial dimensions, length, width, and curvature. Each dimension can be thought of as a set of filters that act heirarchically, mirroring the order in which these features likely evolved. Length is the primary filter: a pollinator that cannot lick (i.e. has a tongue for extending their feeding range beyond their mouth) cannot feed from a tube with length >0. In Grant's (1950) example, this would exclude beetles while including flies and bees. Corolla diameter further filters pollinators. In the case of hummingbirds, long-billed hummingbirds with an advanced reach still cannot access flower tubes adapted to small-billed hummingbirds with small diameters (Temeles XXX, Grant XXX). Curvature enables the corolla tube to occupy a third dimension, applying yet another filter to those pollinators able to access the inner hypanthium. In the case of hummingbirds, straight-billed species can only access the flower as much as the horizontal (x) length of the flower permits. The vertical length is as inaccessible as if the flower was a straight and long. For curve-billed species (e.g.) Phaethornis (Trochilidae).


Random writing from RMarkdown file

In the seed plants, pollen is necessary for fertilization (Bradley 1717), but the ideal pollen is often that which comes from another individual plant of the same species (red queen? XXX). Pollination by animals is an adaptation that can both export and import intraspecific pollen (Miller 1721) while precluding interspecific pollen transfer (Dobbs 1750). For effective pollination, the phenology and morphology of the flower operates in concert with the ethological habits of the pollinator. This is exemplified by the phenomena of dichogamy, pigmentation, and constancy (Sprengel 1793). The shape and size of a flower also plays a role in effective pollination. Grant (1950) proposed that 'mutations causing the petals to grow up as a fused corolla tube around the stamens' may have been one of the primitive adaptations promoting flower constancy. Today it is generally recognized that plants with long and/or narrow corolla tubes promote visitation by hummingbirds, flies, lepitoptrans, and long-tongued hymenoptrans, and exclude those animals (e.g. beetles) unable to reach the inner hypanthium for nectar. While the co-variation of corolla length and diameter have been considered in the context of flower-hummingbird bill diversity (Temeles XXX), curvature has not received the same attention. 

"On each expedition the bee does not fly from a flower of one kind to a flower of another, but flies from one violet, say, to another violet, and never meddles with another flower until it has got back to the hive." Aristotle, in History of Animals, IX, 40, trans. D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson.

	

