---
title: "The inside curve: geometry and pollination ecology of curved flowers"
author:
date: "2019-02-14"
output: 
  word_document: 
    fig_caption: yes
    reference_docx: curvature_review_reference.docx
bibliography: curvature_review.bib
csl: cell.csl
link-citations: true
---

<br>

```{r include=FALSE} 
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo=FALSE, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE)
```

<br>

 You can also embed plots, for example:

```{r curve_example, results='hide', fig.cap="Figure 1. Very cool figure that I done made."}
<insert r code here>
```

<br>

```{r tables_lit_review}
table_1<-read.csv('Table_1_review_lit_curvature.csv', header=TRUE)
knitr::kable(table_1, caption = 'Table 1. Summary of literature reviewed for the role of curvature in plant-pollinator systems.')

table_2<-read.csv('Table_2_epimedium_flower_stages.csv', header=TRUE)
knitr::kable(table_2, caption = 'Table 2. Description of flower stages for Epimedium.')

```


##The inside curve: geometry and pollination ecology of curved flowers.

##Abstract

Astounding insights have been made by comparing flower and pollinator shape as viewed from the front (transverse plane) and from the side (lateral plane). Curvature along the lateral plane (‘floral curvature’) is a widespread, convergent trait with important ecological and evolutionary implications. This review summarizes the methods used to measure floral curvature, suggests a clarification of the definition of curvature, and its translation into a field-portable methodology. Intuitavely, curvature is the degree to which a line is not straight. In plane geometry curvature is defined as the rate at which the unit derivative changes with respect to arc length. We suggest a protocol wherein a line is regressed against landmarks placed on a lateral image of an organism, then computing curvature at many points along the fitted line and taking the sum. The utility of this metric was tested by studying the development of nectar spur curvature in Epimedium (Berberidaceae). Differences in the development of floral curvature were detected between Epimedium koreanum and Epimedium grandiflorum var. violaceum. Inflection points are found in wild-type Epimedium grandiflorum, but are lost in the cultivated variety ‘violaceum’, resulting in loss of total curvature. The suite of functions used to quantify floral curvature in this study are available as an open-source R package ‘curvy’.  The major advantages of this method are 1) precision of measurement is increased without introducing expensive field equipment or computing power, 2) precision of terminology within pollination ecology is improved by borrowing from the existing mathematical literature for studying line-curves, and 3)  the opportunity is opened for investigating the genetic basis of (lateral plane) curvature measured at the cellular scale.

##The ecology of floral curvature

“We are beginning to understand why some hummingbird bills are long, whereas others are short, and why some hummingbird flowers are wide, whereas others are narrow. Now, why are bills of some hummingbirds and the tubes of the flowers they visit curved?” – Temeles (1996).

The realization that plant-pollinator morphology is indicative of function (Sprengel 1793) remains foundational to the study of community structure and co-evolution (e.g. in hummingbird plants: Grant and Grant 1965, Stiles 1995, Maglianesi et al 2014, Martín González et al 2018, Sonne et al 2019).  These complex communities comprise a range of generalists and specialists (Jordano et al 2003), their behaviours and morphology influenced by competition (Muchhala et al 2014, López-Segoviano et al 2017), facilitation (Bergamo et al 2018), mating behaviour (e.g. Temeles et al 2000, Krauss et al 2017), and environmental filtering (Wolowski 2017). Therefore, comparisons of flower and mouthpart shape are useful as a measure of plant-pollinator specificity – patterns in morphological diversity inform communities assembly and evolution. 
	In plant-hummingbird systems, corolla length and diameter are influenced by bill length (and vice versa, e.g. Temeles 1996).  A hummingbird with a long bill cannot necessarily feed from short-tube flowers if their bill is too wide. Flower length and width function as separate filters and a bill must conform to both to access the flower nectary. Curvature of the corolla tube and bill introduce yet another filter. While length and width constrain morphological matching in the transverse (xy) plane (Figure 1), curvature additionally constrains matching in the lateral (xz) and frontal (yz) plane. Curvature is therefore desirable to measure, because a flower that is “more curved” could, for example, be interpreted to be more specialized than another species that is “less curved”. Because pollinator specialization has profound effects on macroevolutionary patterns (Lagomarsino 2017, Kay Seargent etc), curvature is a concept that needs an exact definition and methodology. In this review we summarize the approaches to measuring curvature within the field of plant-hummingbird pollination, identify strengths and shortcomings, and offer a solution with the aim of standardizing how curvature is studied within the field of pollination biology.  Although this review is motivated by the problem of how to measure curvature in plant-hummingbird systems, the solution is general: this case is hopefully made in the demonstration to follow. 


##Summary of the literature

The literature was sourced by querying Google Scholar (Also do second, up-to-date sweep on WOS) for the terms "corolla curvature", "flower curvature", and "hummingbird curvature". Results are summarized in Table 1. 
	25 studies of hummingbird-plant systems were found using some form of curvature metric (Table 1).  An additional 10 studies of other plant, insect, and passerine bird systems were found (Table S1). There were numerous studies on plant-pollinator shapes without a focus on curvature. The first discussion of the importance of curvature in plant-hummingbird interactions begins with Hainsworth (1973) and is first empirically studied by Stiles (1975) - though methods for measuring curvature of bird bills outside of an ecological context can be found much earlier (Baldwin 1931). We identified four common approaches to measuring curvature. First, there are qualitative descriptions of curvature, which have generally been out of use since the 1970s. Second, the ‘arc:chord method’ which considers curvature as a ratio of two lines: a straight line (chord) from tip to base (of the flower or bill) and a line that traverses a path along the length of the flower/bill (arc length, Figure 3). Third, the ‘angle of deflection’ method which defines curvature as the angle between the base of the flower/bill and its tip (Figure 3). Fourth, the use of geometric morphometrics, which quantifies differences between shapes by comparing configurations of homologous points (landmarks) between organisms. 
	The strength of the arc:chord and angle of deflection methods are their portability and accessibility. These measurements can be taken in the field, or soon after from photographs. The methods are intuitive and in the simplest case, require only a ruler, string, and protractor. However, even if the measurements are made using imaging software, these methods have some shortcomings which have been identified and discussed in Berns and Adams (2010). For the arc:chord method, the primary concern is that there are numerous curves with equal arc length that can connect the base and tip of a flower/bill.  It is therefore possible for many different shapes to yield the same arc:chord ratio (Figure 1). For the angle of deflection method, a curve is approximated with the segment of a circle. For the many flower and bill shapes that deviate from having constant curvature, this method falls short (examples).
	Starting in 2010, landmark-based geometric morphometrics (LGM) emerges in the pollination literature. This is a giant leap forward because LGM offers a statistical toolkit for measuring, quantifying, and comparing shapes with high precision and accuracy, as well as their covariation with variables of interest. Since its establishment by Bookstein (1997), the ongoing development of geometric morphometrics has been punctuated by reviews: Adams et al (2004), Adams et al (2013), and for a plant-focused review see Remagnino et al (2016). 
	The limitation of LGM in studying floral form is that this method is concerned with quantifying configurations of landmarks (entire shapes), not curves or segments of shapes. In LGM, configurations of landmarks are packaged as points in shape space (Kendell XXX), and statistical analyses (e.g. PCA, XXX) are run on these points (Figure 3). Therefore, studies that have used this technique to analyse biological forms are able to compare shapes in their entirety, but are ultimately limited to making descriptive statements about how segments of shapes appear to have different curvatures (e.g. Bern and Adams 2013).
	The relative simplicity of shape segments make them ideal for measuring curvature, as defined in the following section. Ideally, LGM results would identify curved segments of interest and the degree of curvature quantified as a complimentary analysis. 

##What is curvature?

Reviewing the literature leads us to ask, “what is curvature?”. Fortunately, this question has been addressed by geometers, and we paraphrase the better explanations of Coolidge (1952), Casey (1996), Rutter (2000), and Jia (2018). First, let us narrow the scope to plane geometry (Heath 1956).  If we are given a point and a line (separate from the point) and are asked to draw an additional line through the point that is parallel to the existing line, there exists only one way to do so (Playfair 1846, Figure 5).  This axiom is only true on planes and excludes other types of space (e.g. spheres). In plane geometry, a straight line is traced when a particle (point) moves without changing direction. Therefore, a curve is traced when a particle moves from its origin and does not maintain its original heading along its entire journey. At every step along its path, our point can be said to have a measure of direction and speed.  The degree to which the particle’s direction changes from one instant to the next is its curvature (Figure 6). Intuitively, a particle that traces a straight line will not change its direction from one position to the next and will have zero curvature. A particle that traces a turning line will have relatively greater curvature. 
	This paragraph needs to be baller: ie mathematically correct AND understandable by the average biologist. This is the most important paragraph in the paper. 
	To compute the curvature of a line a(t)=(x(t), y(t)) at a given moment t, it is useful to parametrize the curve in terms of its arc length s. If the relationship between t and s is known (u=t(s)), then the curve can be re-parameterized as a(u)= (x(u), y(u)). This ensures that the particle will trace out the line in equal intervals of s (δs). At every point along s there is a unit tangent vector T=T/|T|indicating the direction of the particle traveling the curve. Curvature (K) is the change in the value of T, δT, from s to δs . K = dT/ds. Jia (2018) defines curvature as ‘the change in the direction of the tangent with respect to arc length’. This definition has utility in an eco-morphological context, and we suggest that curvature be reserved for this meaning. 

##Application

In order to apply the above definition of curvature, a biological organ or tissue needs to be reduced to a mathematical expression. From this expression we can compute curvature. We propose a workflow as illustrated in Figure 7. Cosgrove (1990) uses this approach to study the development of cucumber hypocotyls. By fitting cubic splines to hand-marked seedlings, curvature was computed using the same definition as above. However, since Cosgrove the entire field of landmark-based geometric morphometrics has unfolded  (Bookstein 1990, Adams Rohlf Slice 2013). This rigorous, reproducible toolkit has been used extensively in pollination ecology, but has not yet been leveraged to calculate curvature (Table 1).  Terral et al (2004) use these tools to digitally landmark olive stones and fit polynomials to the landmarks: synthesizing the concepts of Cosgrove (1990) and Terral et al (2004) produces a modernized method for fitting curves and computing curvature from biological forms (Figure 7). 

Proposed protocol: landmark outlines, regress/fit a curve to the outlines, get equation, calculate curvature metrics from the equation. 


 Outline-based methods use non-homologous landmarks to first demarcate a structure of interest. These pseudolandmarks are then used as coordinates to which a curve can be fitted. The coefficients describing this curve can then be used in multivariate analyses.
